Vladimir Putin announces partial mobilisation for Russian citizens
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered a partial mobilisation of reservists on Wednesday, taking a risky and deeply unpopular step that follows humiliating setbacks for his troops nearly seven months after invading Ukraine.

The first such call-up in Russia since WWII is sure to further fuel tensions with the Western backers of Ukraine, who derided the move as an act of weakness and desperation.

The move also sent Russians scrambling to buy plane tickets out of the country and reportedly sparked some demonstrations.

The Kremlin has struggled to replenish its troops in Ukraine, reaching out for volunteers to serve in battalions. There even have been reports of widespread recruitment in prisons.
 In his seven-minute televised address to the nation, Putin also warned the West he wasn't bluffing over using everything at his disposal to protect Russia – an apparent reference to his nuclear arsenal.

He has previously warned the West not to back Russia against the wall and has rebuked Nato countries for supplying weapons to help Ukraine.

The total number of reservists to be called up could be as high as 300,000, officials said. However, Putin's decree authorising the partial mobilisation offered few details, raising suspicions among analysts and Kremlin critics that the draft could be broadened at any moment. Notably, one clause was kept secret.
 

The Vesna opposition movement called for nationwide protests, although it was unclear how many would act, given Russia’s harsh laws against criticising the military and the war.

“Thousands of Russian men – our fathers, brothers and husbands – will be thrown into the meat grinder of the war,” the group said. “What will they be dying for? What will mothers and children be crying for?”

Avtozak, a Russian group that monitors protests, reported demonstrations attracting dozens of people in cities, including the Siberian cities of Ulan-Ude and Tomsk, and Khabarovsk in the Far East, with some arrests.
 As protest calls circulated online, the Moscow prosecutor’s office warned that organising or participating in such actions could lead to up to 15 years in prison. Authorities issued similar warnings ahead of other protests recently.

The state communication watchdog Roskomnadzor also warned media that access to their websites would be blocked for transmitting “false information” about the mobilisation. It was unclear exactly what that meant.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov, asked what had changed since he and others previously said no mobilisation was planned, said Russia is effectively fighting Nato because the alliance’s members have supplied weapons to Kyiv.
 

The partial mobilisation order came a day after Russian-controlled regions in eastern and southern Ukraine announced plans for referendums on becoming integral parts of Russia – a move that could eventually allow Moscow to escalate the war. The referendums will start on Friday in the Luhansk, Kherson and partly Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia and Donetsk regions.

The balloting is all but certain to go Moscow’s way. Foreign leaders are already calling the votes illegitimate and nonbinding. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said they were a “sham” and “noise” to distract the public.
 US national security council spokesperson John Kirby said Putin’s speech is “definitely a sign that he’s struggling, and we know that”.

Added White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre on MSNBC: “It’s all because Russia is losing ground on the battlefield.”

Kirby told ABC's “Good Morning America” that Russia had suffered tens of thousands of casualties, had command and control issues, terrible troop morale, desertion problems and was “forcing the wounded back (into) the fight”.

British Defence Secretary Ben Wallace described Putin’s move as “an admission that his invasion is failing”.

Russian political analyst Dmitry Oreshkin said it seemed “an act of desperation”. He predicted that Russians will resist the mobilisation through “passive sabotage”.
 Biden to respond to Russian ‘naked aggression’

US President Joe Biden is making Washington's case to world leaders at the United Nations that Russia's “naked aggression” in Ukraine is an affront to the heart of what the international body stands for, as he looks to rally allies to stand firm in backing the Ukrainian resistance.

White House officials said the crux of the president's visit to the UN this year would be a full-throated condemnation of Russia as its brutal war nears the seven-month mark.

“He’ll offer a firm rebuke of Russia’s unjust war in Ukraine and make a call to the world to continue to stand against the naked aggression that we’ve seen these past several months,” White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan said in previewing the president's address.

“He will underscore the importance of strengthening the United Nations and reaffirm core tenets of its charter at a time when a permanent member of the Security Council has struck at the very heart of the charter by challenging the principle of territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
